 Chapter 7
Before the Flood
Gen 6:9-22

 

A NEW section of Genesis commences here. The period from Adam to Noah is almost entirely passed over, probably because there was nothing to record as to the progress of the Kingdom of God. Instead of such a record we have, by contrast, only the solemn and significant summary of the awful progress of sin. We have already seen the development of wickedness which culminated in the awful sins referred to in the previous verses. There is no indication in the Bible of man’s steady rise from a lower to a higher level, developing out of barbarism into holiness. On the contrary, the race is seen to tend downward in proportion as it is left to follow its own way. This view of man’s proneness to evil, with the consequent results, is in exact keeping with the facts of history, and with all the best and most accurate anthropological knowledge of the present day (Orr, Image of God, passim).

The entire section dealing with the generations of Noah (chap. 4: 9 to 9: 29) should be looked at as a whole, and its completeness noted:

1. Noah and his Sons (Gen 6:9-10).

2. The Sinfulness and Condemnation of the World (Gen 6:11-13).

3. The Divine Command (Gen 6:14-21).

4. The Obedience of Noah (Gen 6:22-29; Gen 7:1-9).

5. The Flood (Gen 7:10-24).

6. The Divine Preservation of the Ark (Gen 8:1-22).

7- The New Covenant (Gen 9:1-17).

8. The New Start (Gen 9:18-29).

In studying this material in detail it is important to notice the combination of formal phraseology with the vividness and detail e.g., Gen 6:17-20 and Gen 8:20-22. The dignity of the narrative is also noteworthy. There is nothing grotesque or unworthy, everything is sober and in keeping with the solemn realities involved. The simplicity and genuineness of Noah s character, the simple and righteous motives ascribed to God, the sobriety and purity of the promise made to Noah, should all be observed. Not least of all it will be noticed that the story of the Flood, as such, is quite incidental to the spiritual realities that arise out of the events. The narrative leads up to the covenant in chapter 9, which carries with it the new start of the human race after the failure between Adam and Noah.

It is impossible to dwell in detail on the entire narrative of the Flood: it must suffice to follow mainly the pages of our English Bible, and look at the spiritual truths associated with (1) the period immediately preceding the Flood, (2) the time of the Flood itself, and (3) the early days of the new era after the Flood. We now dwell first of all upon the verses at the head of this section.

The contrast between the sin recorded in Gen 6:7 and the character of Noah in Gen 6:8-10 is very striking, especially as it is followed by another contrast in the verses now before us.

I. The Divine Purpose (Gen 6:9-13)

The divine purpose is now clearly stated to be a judgment upon sin. Its cause is due to the awful character of mankind (Gen 6:11). The two words, "corrupt and violence" give us respectively the character and expression of the sin, the cause and the effect. The corruption has led to violence, for badness always leads to cruelty in one form or another. A life that is wrong with God necessarily becomes wrong with its fellows.

The Divine Scrutiny is also stated in simple but solemn terms (Gen 6:12). God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt. How great is the contrast here with a former occasion: God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good (Gen 1:31). God is not indifferent to human life, and the fact of sin necessarily compelled Him to take action. His decision to destroy the earth was at once an expression of His justice and His mercy; the end had come, and there was no alternative. Moral putridity can only be destroyed by a Divine judgment.

II. The Divine Plan (Gen 6:14-17).

The method of deliverance was the Ark of Safety about which God now proceeds to speak. The instructions are given in full detail. The ark is to be made of gopher wood, by which is probably to be under stood some resinous wood like that of the fir or cypress tree. The vessel was in no sense a ship intended for a voyage, but a kind of covered raft or floating house, sufficient for buoyancy and protection during the flood. Into the details of shape and space it is unnecessary to enter, except to notice the minute care shown by these details and the indications they afford of the Divine thought for the inmates of the ark.

With great solemnity God announces his intention of bringing a flood upon the earth to destroy all life. "Behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth." Thus solemnly does God call His servant’s attention to what is to happen and also to the fact that the flood is His own divine act.

III. The Divine Provision (Gen 6:18-22).

In contrast with the announcement of the flood comes this declaration of the divine covenant. It is noteworthy that we have the word establish in connection with the covenant. Noah was already in covenant with God (Gen 6:8), but in view of the special need of assurance of divine protection God now declares that He will establish His covenant. This is the first occasion on which we have this word "covenant" one of the great outstanding expressions of Holy Scripture as indicative of God’s relations with man. It is particularly interesting to notice that the covenant was with Noah only, his family being included because of their connection with him. It is worth while observing that in Holy Scripture the family rather than the individual constitutes the true unity. The race, as we well know, fell in Adam, and here in like manner Noah’s family was saved for his sake. Other instances like those of Abraham and Cain confirm this view of what is now usually described as the solidarity of mankind. The Apostle Peter, on the Day of Pentecost, seems to recognize the same principle when he says; the promise is to you, and to your children. What a responsibility this places upon parentage and guardianship and every other position involving the lives of others.

God’s care of the animals is not to be overlooked in the study of these verses. Two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive (Gen 6:20).

To all this Noah made a fitting response (Gen 6:22). Twice over we are told simply and suggestively that he did according to all that God commanded him.

Suggestions for Meditation

In these verses we have some of the essential elements in the life of a true believer as illustrated by Noah.

1. His Position (Gen 6:8).

"Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord." This was the foundation of his life as it is the foundation of every true life today. By grace are ye saved. Grace, in the Bible sense of the word, means God’s unmerited favour, and it was this alone that gave Noah his spiritual position before God. He was saved by grace alone.

2. His Attitude (Gen 6:9).

"Noah was a righteous man." From grace comes righteousness, and whether we think of its Old Testament meaning of genuine ness and sincerity, or of its New Testament fuller meaning of being right with God, we can see its necessity and importance for every one of us.

3. His Character (Gen 6:9).

"Noah was…perfect." The original word means upright, genuine, and has no reference to the absence of sin. Uprightness in turn is the result of being righteous before God through grace. Our personal character must necessarily be the proof of our true position in the sight of God.

4. His Testimony (Gen 6:9).

"In his generations." Here we have brought before us the thought of Noah’s life in relation to his contemporaries. He lived a life of witness to God among those with whom he was associated. As the Apostle Peter tells us, he was a preacher of righteousness (2Pe 2:5). His life as well as his words bore testimony to God and thus condemned the world of his day (Heb 11:7).

5. His Fellowship (Gen 6:9).

"Noah walked with God." He is one of two men of whom this is recorded (Gen 5:22). The idea is that of friendship and fellowship with God, and it is note worthy that such a position was possible amidst the very difficult, practical, every-day life that Noah had to lead. It meant courage and independence, for no one else was walking in that way. When a man walks with God it necessarily means that he cannot walk with any of his fellows who are going in the opposite direction.

6. His Conduct (Gen 6:22).

"Thus did Noah." His spiritual position, attitude, character and fellowship were expressed and proved in practical obedience. Nothing can make up for this. All our privileges and opportunities of grace are intended to be manifested in daily obedience. Conduct is three-fourths of life.

7. His Thoroughness (Gen 6:22).

"According to all that God commanded him." This was the standard by which Noah lived, the Word of God and everything that that Word had declared. He did not pick and choose among God’s commands but did according to all that God had said. It was this Word of God that led him to prepare the ark, being warned of God of things not seen as yet (Heb 11:7).

What a splendid figure this man makes; a picture of solitary goodness! He was the one saint of that day. It is possible, therefore, to be good even though we have to stand alone. It is possible to be right with God even amidst surrounding iniquity. God is the same to-day as He was to Noah, and if only we are willing to fulfill the conditions we too shall walk with God and please Him. 