 Chapter 22
The Covenant Renewed
Gen 17:1-27

 

GOD has always some fresh surprise of knowledge, grace, and blessing with which to delight His children. We see this again and again in the life of Abraham, and not least of all in the story recorded in the present chapter. This episode was a great step forward in Abraham’s spiritual relationship to God, as well as in his personal experience.

I. The Fresh Revelation (Gen 17:1-8).

Abraham was at this period ninety-nine years old. Thirteen years had elapsed since the trouble about Hagar (Gen 16:16). Nothing is recorded of these years, and we may assume that there was no special or new revelation of God’s will during the time. It was an opportunity of quiet waiting for, and waiting on God. Now once again the Lord appears to His servant.

This fresh appearance of God brought with it a new message (Gen 17:1). "I am the Almighty God." This was a new title of God (Hebrew: "El Shaddai"). The root idea seems to be that of power and ability, and is best rendered by the phrase the "Mighty God," the addition of "All" being no necessary part of the word. This special emphasis upon God’s power was very appropriate to the new message about to be given.

New knowledge always carries new responsibilities and we are not surprised to note the definite claim (Gen 17:1). "Walk before Me, and be thou perfect" (upright). God called upon His servant to live and move in the Divine presence, and to be sincere, genuine, and true-hearted. Is this a hint that Abraham was settling down, satisfied with Ishmael, and no longer anxious about the special seed promised by God? Something of this seems to have been the case, or we should have hardly had this very definite call.

The personal result was soon seen (Gen 17:3). "Abraham fell on his face." This attitude of reverence and of readiness shows that Abraham realized at once the solemnity of the occasion.

And now for the first time we seem to become fully conscious of Abraham’s high privilege (Gen 17:3). God talked with him. Few of those whose lives are recorded in the Old Testament were on the same spiritual footing as Abraham. God once again shows His trust in His servant, and that He will not hide from him what He is about to do. How beautiful is the picture of this holy familiarity between the Mighty God and His servant!

Nor are we surprised to find that God gives to His servant a specially strong assurance (Gen 17:4). "As for Me, behold, My covenant is with thee." These words are evidently intended, by their emphatic reference to God Himself ("as for Me"), as a reminder to Abraham that, whatever he had forgotten, God had not been unmindful of His solemn promises. It is noteworthy that God reminds Abraham of an already existing covenant ("My covenant is with thee"), and then proceeds to tell him some of the forthcoming results of this existing fact. Not even the silence of thirteen years, still less the birth of Ishmael, can alter God’s purposes or change His mind concerning Abraham.

The detailed promises of this new revelation deserve the most careful study (Gen 17:4-8). They deal with three great facts: (a) Abraham himself, (b) the land, (c) his seed. At this point a comparison should be made of the growth in the details of the revelation of God’s purpose: chapter 12, a great nation; chapter 13, as the dust of the earth; chapter 15, as the stars of heaven; chapter 17, many nations.

II. The Necessary Requirements (Gen 17:9-14).

Abraham is now told his part in the matter, and it is very striking and suggestive to notice that all he has to do is obey God’s word in the one respect mentioned in these verses. This is another illustration of the fact that God’s covenant of grace is divinely one-sided. God is the Giver; man the receiver, not the equal. The conditions to be fulfilled (Gen 17:10-14) are now stated. The ordinance of circumcision, already known widely in the East, is given a special meaning and deep sacredness. The truths connected with it seem to include at least four ideas: (a) designation, as belonging to God; (b) separation unto Him; (c) purity in Him; (d) possession by Him. It is also noteworthy that we are here brought face to face for the first time in Holy Scripture with young life in relation to God. God entered into covenant with little children, and as the covenant with Abraham was one of grace we see the true place of little children in the kingdom of God. Circumcision was not merely a mark of the Mosaic dispensation and Jewish covenant of works; it was, as here, pre-Mosaic, associated with the covenant of grace, and therefore independent of, and wider than, the Jewish national life (Joh 7:22). God is here seen in the attitude of Father to little children, and He has never altered that attitude.

III. The Further Revelation (Gen 17:15-16).

Not only Abraham’s, but also his wife’s name is now changed. This is another indication of God’s purpose and a special assurance of blessing. And now for the first time Sarah is announced as the mother of the promised seed. Up to this moment everything had been couched in general terms as to seed, but without special reference to Sarah. God’s promises become more definite and detailed as time goes on and need arises.

IV. The Immediate Response (Gen 17:17-18).

Abraham receives the new revelation of God with reverence, and yet with a certain trustful astonishment. The laugh is evidently not the laugh of unbelief, but of a faith which, while taking God at His word, considers the news almost too good to be true. God’s revelations to His people often seem to be too good to be true, and yet they are true!

But there is one shadow over the scene. He is thinking of his growing son. How natural was this appeal on behalf of Ishmael! The boy had won his way to his father’s heart, and it would have been surprising from the natural and human standpoint if Abraham had not desired Ishmael to be his heir. And yet, notwithstanding the naturalness of the appeal, there lies at the root of it a desire to have some substitute for God’s promises. It is as though anything else would really do as well. God knows better than his servant, and we have His answer at once.

V. The Full Revelation (Gen 17:19-22).

Not even the intense appeal can stand before God’s purposes. God will maintain His own way, and so He assures Abraham that Sarah is indeed to be the mother of the seed, that the son s name shall be Isaac ("Laughter"), and that the covenant which is to be everlasting is to be realized through Isaac, and not through Ishmael.

Nevertheless Ishmael shall not be forgotten. He is Abraham’s seed, and as the son of God’s servant he will be blessed and made a great nation. Thus God overrules His children’s mistakes, and in loving condescension and tender mercy brings blessing out of trouble.

VI. The Loyal Reception (Gen 17:23-27).

Now the time of communion has come to an end, and God leaves His servant to ponder what has been said and to respond to the revelation.

How prompt was his obedience (Gen 17:23). In the selfsame day, as God had said. How striking in their simplicity are these words, indicating the immediateness of Abraham’s trustful obedience! This is ever the pathway of blessing. Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it, and do it at once!

How complete was his acceptance (Gen 17:27). Not only as to himself and Ishmael, but also as to all his house, Abraham fulfilled the Divine requirement and bestowed the sign of the covenant. They were all included in the Divine blessings, for God knew that Abraham would influence his whole household aright.

Suggestions for Meditation

In this fresh revelation Abraham learned much about God, and the same lessons are needed by us to day. The more we know of God, the stronger and richer will be our lives.

1. A new vision of God’s Character.

God revealed Himself to Abraham as a God of might and power (Gen 17:1), and, as such, able to fulfill all his hopes. God does not wish His children to be content with anything else than His fullest blessings, and for the accomplishment of this He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. The various passages in the New Testament where we read that God is able call for earnest meditation.

2. A wider view of God’s Purposes.

Abraham little realized the far-reaching extent and universal scope of God’s purpose concerning him. He was now taught this as he had never been taught before, in great wealth of detail and definiteness of meaning. It is always well to have our view of God’s mind for the world extended and deepened, and so think His thoughts after Him.

3. A clearer view of God’s Will.

God’s will for us, as it was for Abraham, is loyal obedience. As the little child said of the angels in heaven who do God’s will there, they obey without asking any questions. This and this alone, is the secret of power in daily living.

4. A fuller view of God’s Grace.

The whole chapter is full of grace. It was grace that prompted, planned, and provided these blessings for Abraham. It was grace that condescended to Abraham’s weaknesses, limitations, and faults. It was grace that persisted with Abraham in spite of every check and drawback, and it was grace that perfected everything concerning him. God is still the God of all grace, and it is the Believer’s joy to experience the unsearchable riches of His grace in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. 