 Chapter 16
The Separation
Gen 13:5-18

 

GOD teaches His children new lessons at every step of life’s pathway. We are now to gain a deeper insight into the reality of Abraham’s life, as well as a fuller revelation of God’s will concerning him.

I. A Serious Problem (Gen 13:5-6).

Abraham and Lot were rich. The accessions which came to them in Egypt had increased their flocks and herds. This is the first instance of riches in the Bible (Gen 13:2), and we also have here the interesting problem of wealth connected with the Believer’s life. What is the teaching of Scripture about wealth as possessed by a child of God? A careful study of the entire Bible seems to show that there is no sin in being wealthy provided the riches have been honorably obtained, are regarded as belonging to God, and are being constantly used as in the sight of God. At the same time, wealth very seriously increases the responsibility of a believer, and his riches will soon become a sin if they are not used properly and with a sense of stewardship, not of ownership. Another experience of human life is seen in this story the danger of quarrels between relatives on account of wealth. How often this deplorable fact has been experienced since Abraham’s day!

The possession of such flocks and herds prevented the uncle and nephew from continuing to dwell together. The need of increasing pasturage, together with the need of water, must have been very acute, and the problem was intensified by the presence of the Canaanites with their pastoral requirements.

II. A Deplorable Strife (Gen 13:7).

The quarrel originated with the servants, and was limited to them. Doubtless each herd man endeavored to gain the best locality for his own flocks.

Very significantly we read that The Canaanite and Perizzite dwelled then in the land. This statement suggests not only the circumstance that accentuated the difficulty of obtaining pasturage, but also the fact that the heathen around must have seen and overheard this quarrel between the servants of God’s children. Herein lay one of the saddest elements of the matter.

III. A Generous Proposal Gen 13:8-9).

Abraham takes the initiative, and begs that there shall be no strife. The quarrel might easily rise above the servants to the masters, and Abraham speaks in time to prevent this, urging as the great reason, "We are brethren." Notice his large-hearted suggestion. Although he is older than Lot and chief of the tribe or clan, and although the land had been promised by God to him, he allows his nephew the first choice. The servant of God must not strive (2Ti 2:24). How beautifully Abraham had recovered from his fall in Egypt! While there he had learned the great lesson that no one needs to descend to deceit in order to obtain his desires. The true child of God can afford to be magnanimous, simply because he is a child of God.

IV. A Selfish Choice (Gen 13:10-13).

Lot there upon took the generous Abraham at his word, and seeing that the plain of Jordan was well watered everywhere, he chose that region, and departed thither. This was the sole reason that prompted his choice. He saw the great advantage to him and his possessions in that most fertile of regions.

The land was indeed fertile, but as he moved his tent as far as Sodom (Gen 13:12, R.V.) it soon became evident what danger he was in. The material blessing was accompanied by moral blight. There are many modern counterparts to Lot’s action; even professedly Christian people often choose their home in a locality simply for its scenery, or its society, or its other material advantages without once inquiring what Church privileges are there. The souls of their children may starve amid worldliness and polite indifference. The same disastrous choice is often made in connection with public schools, to which boys are sent simply for the position and reputation of the school, regardless of the moral and spiritual atmosphere of the institution. This was the great mistake of Lot s life, from which he ever afterwards suffered.

V. A Divine Revelation (Gen 13:14-17).

"After that Lost was separated from him." Abraham was now alone, and perhaps in his solitude he began to wonder whether he had done right, or whether his offer to Lot was due to weakness and the lack of true assertion of rights. There is often a temptation to reaction after a great moral decision has been made. Just at this time, then, and when he was alone, God came to him with Divine assurances and blessed compensation.

The revelation of the Divine purposes was fuller than any that preceded it (Gen 12:1 and Gen 12:7). Notice its three aspects:

(a) The prospect afforded (Gen 13:14). Lot had lifted up his eyes (Gen 13:10), and with remarkable force and significant emphasis God says to Abraham, "Lift up now thine eyes." How different the action is in each case! Abraham’s prospect was not only wider, but infinitely more glorious, because of the Word of God behind it.

(b) The promise given (Gen 13:15-16). For the first time God promises the land to Abraham himself. To thee will I give it; hitherto the land had only been promised to his seed (Gen 12:7). Let us ponder these wonderful promises. They are to be interpreted literally and spiritually. They are already having their primary fulfilment in the Church of Christ as Abraham’s spiritual seed (Gal 3:7-9; Gal 3:16), but there will surely be a literal fulfilment in the future to the Jewish nation (Rom 11:26-29).

(c) The possession enjoined (Gen 13:17). Abraham is to "walk up and down," and, as it were, appropriate and claim for himself in detail that which God gives (cf. Jos 1:3). The promises of God are to be appropriated by faith, and it is thus the purpose of God becomes realized in individual experience.

"Then Abraham moved his tent." Immediately he responded to God and pitched his tent at Mamre, which is in Hebron. Hebron means "fellowship" and we may spiritualize the thought by saying that prompt whole-hearted obedience always leads to fellowship with God.

"Built there an altar." Again we see the real man in this simple, whole-hearted testimony to the Divine presence and promises. His tent and his altar indicate the pilgrim and devout life of the true child of God.

 

Suggestions for Meditation

1. Differences in Believers.

What a contrast between Lot and Abraham! Except for 2Pe 2:7-8, we should nave hardly credited Lot with any vital religion. Although "righteous" he is yet living by sight, seeking only his own advantages and pleasure; worldliness is his dominant characteristic, his one thought is the well- watered plains. He is a type and illustration of the Christian who is not fully consecrated one who is trying to make the best of both worlds, endeavoring to stand well with God, while pushing to the full his own earthly interests. Yet one part of his life must necessarily suffer; so it was with Lot, so it is always. Contrast Abraham with his large-heartedness of spirit, his simple acceptance of God’s promises, his whole-hearted obedience to God’s will, and his courageous testimony in the altar of worship. He is a type and illustration of the consecrated believer, the one who puts God first, and to whom God’s presence, God’s will, and God’s way are everything. These differences in believers are as striking and as puzzling to-day as ever, yet they ought not to exist in the Church of Christ.

2. Differences between Believers.

Even the children of God from time to time have their differences of opinion, which often lead to trouble and strife. If only they are met with magnanimity like Abraham’s, they will soon be resolved. Note the New Testament emphasis on mutual submission (Eph 5:21; 1Pe 5:5). The Christian paradox of everybody submitting to everybody else would soon heal all dissensions between believers. Magnanimity in Abraham was the result of his faith in God. He could afford to be large-hearted because God was so real to him. Those who put God first will never be bereft of their just rights. God is pledged on their behalf (Pro 3:5-6).

3. Differences for Believers.

The results in the lives of Lot and Abraham were vastly different. Lot obtained what he wanted, earthly prosperity, but spiritually it may be questioned whether he was ever happy after making that choice. There was no witness for God, no real blessing on his home, and in the end came spiritual and social disaster. Abraham’s experience was very different; God became an increasing reality to him, there was a glory and power in his life, and we are sure that he never regretted his action in putting God first. God’s children always experience His Divine favour and blessing in proportion to their faithfulness, and if we are inclined to question and seek for the reason of differences in the spiritual experiences of the children of God we may find them in the difference of response to God on the part of His followers. 